---
title: "Observation of Gravity Waves at the Tropical Tropopause Using Superpressure Balloons"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2021-07-14-obs-GW
excerpt: 'Tropical gravity wave activity is characterized from long-duration superpressure balloon flights. Gravity-wave momentum fluxes exhibit a clear dependence to the distance to the nearest convective system. Observed wave intermittency results from the time- and spatially-varying distribution of the source'
date: 2021-07-14
venue: 'Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres'
paperurl: 'https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1029/2021JD035165'
citation: 'Corcos, M., Hertzog, A., Plougonven, R., Podglajen, A. (2021). &quot;Observation of Gravity Waves at the Tropical Tropopause Using Superpressure Balloons&quot; <i> Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 1</i>. 1(1).'
---


### Abstract:

Tropical gravity wave activity is investigated using measurements of momentum fluxes gathered during Strateole-2 superpressure balloon flights. The data set consists of eight balloon flights performed in the deep tropics from November 2019 to February 2020. The flights lasted for 2–3 months each, and in-situ meteorological data were collected every 30 s. The relation between gravity waves and deep convection is investigated using geostationary satellite data from the NOAA/NCEP GPM_MERGIR satellite data product, at 1 h resolution. The amplitude of gravity wave momentum fluxes shows a clear dependence on the distance to the nearest convective system, with a strong decay as distance to convection increases. The largest momentum-flux values (>5 mPa) are only found less than 200 km away from deep convection. The sensitivity of the wave flux to distance from convection is stronger for high frequency gravity waves (periods shorter than 60 min). Lower frequency waves tend to a non-zero, background value away from convection, supporting some background value in gravity-wave drag parameterizations. On the other hand, the wide range of momentum flux values observed close to the convection emphasizes the intermittent nature of the gravity-wave source. The large scale variation of gravity-wave intermittency within the equatorial belt is also studied. The results highlight spatial variations of gravity wave activity, with the highest momentum flux recorded over land.
